Skip to Content
Primary Navigation
Visit 
Exhibitions 
Art & Artists 
Events 
Secondary Navigation
Buy Tickets
Become a Member
Shop

THE LOOK OF COMPASSION

Uncovering the Many Faces of Guanyin

CLICK TO CONTINUE
1/20
A Helping Hand

One of the most popular deities of Chinese Buddhism is the bodhisattva of compassion, Guanyin (“Perceiver of Sounds”), who works miracles in response to pleas for help.

This sculpture of Guanyin is larger than life-size and carved in the round.

It is made from the wood of the foxglove (Paulownia), a fast-growing tree found throughout China.

This form of the deity, known as the Southern Sea Guanyin, is associated with a mountainous island off the coast of present-day Shanghai. The site has been a major pilgrimage destination since around the 10th century.

The Southern Sea Guanyin is characterized by its attentive yet relaxed stance, a distinctive pose called “royal ease.”

Acquired by the Art Institute in 1923, the sculpture was displayed in the museum for decades before conservators discovered that its grayish patina was a dirty wax coating that was obscuring much older paint layers. A years-long scientific investigation revealed that the sculpture’s appearance had changed in dramatic ways over time.

Looking Through

Conservators used radiocarbon analysis to date the sculpture to the 11th or 12th century.

X-radiography shows the figure is constructed of three large wood blocks assembled with mortise-and-tenon joints. The presence of machine-made nails signals later repairs and additions.

A Human Touch

In addition to a striking pose, the sculpture was given light-pinkish skin tones, blue hair, and brightly patterned clothing—possibly in imitation of the patchwork robes worn by monks. These painted features became more perceptible during conservation, as seen in the photographs at left (taken in 2017).

Much of this first paint phase was lost, damaged, or obscured by later layers, but several details hint at its rich effect.

Juxtaposed patterns evoke a patchwork textile.

Red medallions against a yellow background appear on the front and back sides.

Thin arabesques decorate the lower skirt.

One of these details is an intersecting-star pattern rendered with the cut-gold (tiejin or jiejin) technique. This involves cutting thin slivers of gold leaf and individually laying each strip upon a surface to create the desired pattern. The cut-gold on this Guanyin was underlaid with tin, perhaps an economic measure to strengthen and extend the reach of the thinly hammered precious metal.

The cross-section shows a vermilion background (1), a tin metal layer (2), the cut-gold leaf (3), and a paint layer from a later phase (4).

Reflecting the Divine

The sculpture’s front side was entirely repainted at one point, probably during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644). Both the body and the clothing were gilded, creating an effect of brilliant radiance that may have evoked a construction of gold, bronze, or even light itself.

The golden robe was additionally decorated with dragons and clouds (outlined in red in this image), using a raised-line technique known as lifen.

Layers of the lifen: calcium-carbonate-based filler (1) covered with a second, thin application of kaolin (2), a bole colored with red-iron oxide (3), and gold leaf (4).

A similar technique, seen on the lid of this early 16th-century casket made in Italy, was also popular in Europe. There it is known by the Italian word pastiglia.

Due to prior damage and interventions, hardly any of the Ming-era gilding remains on the face. But paint traces around the mouth and chin indicate that the deity had a delicate blue mustache and beard at this time, emphasizing its masculinity.

Representations of Guanyin later became increasingly feminine in appearance, as seen in this porcelain figure of Guanyin from the 17th or 18th century.

A Living Deity

Material evidence on the Guanyin sculpture shows that its appearance continued to change after the Ming dynasty, evolving along with viewer expectations: its skin tones were repainted pink and, later, altered once more to white. 


Guanyin continues to give rise to popular images in Chinese visual culture in addition to being worshipped in many forms and guises.

What should this sculpture look like today?

Museum conservators chose an unusual technique to compensate for surface damage. Instead of retouching the work with paint, they dyed strips of handmade paper in pink and golden tones that approximate aged gilding; these were then applied to areas of paint loss. The paper strips are easily reversible, and viewers can distinguish between restoration and historical materials.

This conservation approach acknowledges the Guanyin sculpture’s multiple authenticities and preserves its dynamic material history, holding open the sculpture’s potential to further change.

FURTHER READING
PROVENANCE STORIES
Professor Chōyō and the Chicago Craze for Japanese Prints
INSIDE THE EXHIBITION
Symbolist Geographies
PERSPECTIVES
Projecting Fictions: Women in Art
GALLERY SPOTLIGHT
Five Things to See Before They Go
Sign up for our enewsletter to receive updates.
Email address
Subscribe
See all newsletters 
News and Exhibitions
Career Opportunities
Families
Public Programs
K-12 Educator Resources
Teen Opportunities
Research, Publishing, and Conservation
BACK TO TOP 
Footer content
Primary Navigation
Visit
Exhibitions and Events
The Collection
Locations
Michigan Avenue Entrance
111 South Michigan Avenue
Chicago, IL 60603
Modern Wing Entrance
159 East Monroe Street
Chicago, IL 60603
About us
Mission and History
Leadership
Departments
Financial Reporting
Support us
Membership
Luminary
Planned Giving
Corporate Sponsorship
Learn with us
Families
Teens
Educators
Ryan Learning Center
Follow us
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
Footer Links
Press
Careers
Contact
Venue Rental
Image Licensing
SAIC
Terms